Initial draft of Client package requirements (#20466)
microsoft/FluidFramework: ClientRequirments.md

# Platform Requirements for Fluid Framework Client Packages

These are the platform requirements for the current version of Fluid Framework Client Packages.

> These are intentionally quite strict as they have to be supported for the entire LTS timeline for LTS versions.

Reviewer: LTS should be Long Term Support (LTS)

> These restrictions can be loosened over time, adding support for specific configurations desired by users of the client packages.

Reviewer: "can be loosened" is confusing (and maybe ambiguous). Do we plan to loosen requirements? Or expand supported configurations in ways not explicitly described here. Also, should this document be version specific?

Author: Maybe I'm missing something, but don't "loosening the requirements" and "expanding supported configurations" mean exactly the same thing? Both are changes to this document that cause a strict superset of configurations previously supported to be classified as supported by strictly reducing the constrains that are included in this document on what counts as supported.

Author: > should this document be version specific?

This document, by its nature of being included in the repo (and likely included in package readmes) applies to what ever version of the packages its included with, and could theoretically be changed between versions to add support for new configurations (along with any needed code and test changes which could be merged together).

It is structured to reduce the need to update this document over time to help prevent it from getting out of date, but it will have to be updated for the next major version (FF 3.0) as it will almost certainly be targeting different versions of everything.

> It is likely the other configurations will work, but there are not "supported" and thus if they stop working it is not considered a breaking change.

Reviewer: It is likely *that* other configurations will work, but *as they* are not supported, if they stop working, that is not a breaking change.

> If you would benefit from support for something not listed here, file an issue and the request will be evaluated.

Reviewer: "file an issue and the product team will evaluate your request"

-   Modern browsers supporting the es2022 standard library: in response to asks we can add explicit support for using babel to polyfill to target specific standards or runtimes (meaning we can avoid/remove use of things that don't polyfill robustly, but otherwise target modern standards).

## Supported Tools

-   TypeScript 5.4:
    -   All [`strict`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig) options are supported.
    -   [`strictNullChecks`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig) is required.
    -   ["Backwards Compatibility"](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig) options are not supported.
    -   TODO: "Interop Constraints" requirements.
-   [webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) 5:
    -   TODO: list requirements to make our client packages work with webpack (ex: what polyfills we need, etc.). Maybe we should publish a supported know to work config (ex: fully working source maps, all needed polyfills) which we can update as part of the client packages?

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

## Module Resolution

[`Node16`, `NodeNext`, or `Bundler`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig#moduleResolution) resolution should be used with TypeScript compilerOptions to follow the [Node.js v12+ ESM Resolution and Loading algorithm](https://nodejs.github.io/nodejs.dev/en/api/v20/esm/#resolution-and-loading-algorithm). Node10 resolution is not supported as it does not support Fluid Framework's API structuring pattern that is used to distinguish stable APIs from those that are in development.

```

## Module Formats

-   ES Modules:
    ES Modules are the preferred way to consume our client packages (including in NodeJs) and consuming our client packages from ES Modules is fully supported.
    TODO: details. Module resolution etc?
-   CommonJs:

>     Consuming our client packages as CommonJs is supported only in NodeJS and only for development and testing. This is done to accommodate some workflows without good ES Module support.

Reviewer 2: Could we go further and say it is just supported for Jest?

Author: I adjusted it refer to the list bellow, which is currently just Jest, which I think meets your suggestion.

# Platform Requirements for Fluid Framework Client Packages

These are the platform requirements for the current version of Fluid Framework Client Packages.

> These requirements error on the side of being too strict since within a major version they can be relaxed over time, but not made stricter.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These requirements err on the side of being too strict since within a major version they can be relaxed over time, but not made stricter.
```

> For Long Term Support (LTS) versions this can require supporting these platforms for several years.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For Long Term Support (LTS) versions this can require meeting these requirements for several years.
```

Author: I think that's wrong. Fluid Framework 2.0 would not support the **requirement** that customers use TypeScript 5.4. Instead it supports customers who use TypeScript 5.4 with NodeJS 20 via esm (the platform is what we support, not a requirement: the requirements define a set of platforms which are supported).

Another way to look at this:
Removing a requirement increases what we support, so we are allowed to relax/remove requirements, and thus we aren't required to keep all our requirements over the LTS timeline, so saying "requirement" here seems backwards.

Author: I'm open to suggestions on how to increase clarity around this, since I'm sure there is a better way to express this but I haven't found one.

Reviewer 4: Maybe "supported platforms" instead of "platform requirements"?

Reviewer 3: Look at it now, I have no idea how I came to make this suggestion. 🙃
Feel free to resolve without further action.

> It is likely that other configurations will work, but they are not supported: if they stop working, that is not a breaking change.

Reviewer 5: Nit
```suggestion
It is likely that other configurations will work, but they are not supported: if they stop working, we do not consider that a bug.
```

If you would benefit from support for something not listed here, file an issue and the product team will evaluate your request.

> When making such a request please include if the a configuration already works (and thus the request is just that it becomes officially supported), or if changes are required to get it working.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When making such a request please include if the configuration already works (and thus the request is just that it becomes officially supported), or if changes are required to get it working.
```

## Supported Runtimes

> -   NodeJs ^20.10.0 except that we will drop support for it [when NodeJs 20 loses its upstream support on 2026-04-30](https://github.com/nodejs/release#release-schedule), and will support a newer LTS version of NodeJS (22) at least 1 year before 20 is end of life. This same policy applies to NodeJS 22 when it is end of life (2027-04-30).

Reviewer 4: Nit, or "1 year before 20 stops receiving upstream support" would work too. No big preference.
```suggestion
-   NodeJs ^20.10.0 except that we will drop support for it [when NodeJs 20 loses its upstream support on 2026-04-30](https://github.com/nodejs/release#release-schedule), and will support a newer LTS version of NodeJS (22) at least 1 year before 20 is end-of-life. This same policy applies to NodeJS 22 when it is end of life (2027-04-30).
```

-   Modern browsers supporting the es2022 standard library: in response to asks we can add explicit support for using babel to polyfill to target specific standards or runtimes (meaning we can avoid/remove use of things that don't polyfill robustly, but otherwise target modern standards).

## Supported Tools

> -   TypeScript 5.4:

Reviewer 6: Seems aggressive since we don't use 5.4 ourselves.

Author: A large part of why we want to document these requirements is to allow us to move forward with newer tooling (ex: node 20, updated typescript). Since currently we effectively require our users to have TypeScript as new as we use (since we don't have back compat testing for older TS), I think it makes sense to update our requirements before we update what we use so this being newer than what we use should not be surprising.

That said, it is a very aggressive target: I won't be surprised if a customer asks us to add support for an older version, but until that happens, we might as well target something aggressive just in case its actually ok for us to target 5.4 since getting stuck on 5.2 for the next 3 years if no customer actually needed us to do that would be a waste. We can always add more support for old versions, but we can't move our minimum version forward without a breaking change.

    -   All [`strict`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig) options are supported.
    -   [`strictNullChecks`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig) is required.
    -   [Configuration options deprecated in 5.0](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/issues/51909) are not supported.

> -   [webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) 5

Reviewer 5: It might be worth noting that we aren't be prescriptive about bundlers here, only that we actually validate this one as a part of our own build.

## Module Resolution

[`Node16`, `NodeNext`, or `Bundler`](https://www.typescriptlang.org/tsconfig#moduleResolution) resolution should be used with TypeScript compilerOptions to follow the [Node.js v12+ ESM Resolution and Loading algorithm](https://nodejs.github.io/nodejs.dev/en/api/v20/esm/#resolution-and-loading-algorithm).
Node10 resolution is not supported as it does not support Fluid Framework's API structuring pattern that is used to distinguish stable APIs from those that are in development.

## Module Formats

-   ES Modules:
    ES Modules are the preferred way to consume our client packages (including in NodeJs) and consuming our client packages from ES Modules is fully supported.
-   CommonJs:
    Consuming our client packages as CommonJs is supported only in NodeJS and only for the cases listed below.
    This is done to accommodate some workflows without good ES Module support.
    If you have a workflow you would like included in this list, file an issue.
    Once this list of workflows motivating CommonJS support is empty, we may drop support for CommonJS one year after notice of the change is posted here.

>     -   Testing with Jest (Which lacks [stable ESM support](https://jestjs.io/docs/ecmascript-modules) due to [unstable APIs in NodeJs](https://github.com/nodejs/node/issues/37648))

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    -   Testing with Jest (which lacks [stable ESM support](https://jestjs.io/docs/ecmascript-modules) due to [unstable APIs in NodeJs](https://github.com/nodejs/node/issues/37648))
```
